Model selection and issues



Current models
==============

Initial models
--------------

Continuing from the GAMs being run previously for juvenile proportion,
models for family size also used GAMs and were run on the SOVON flock
level data, which were untabled to get family level data. An effect of
this was the duplication of flock attributes (flock size, position,
etc.) as many times as there were families in the flock. The initial
models were run using mgcv::gam, with the random effects specified as
random intercepts using the smoothing basis "re". The results were then
checked by running the same model using the function mgcv::gamm, which
assumes nestedness or hierarchical structure in the random effects. In
this case, the random effects were specified so that observer was
"nested" within habitat type which was nested within breeding year.

The models differed in their results, with flock size and longitude
found to be significant effects by the simpler gam which assumed i.i.d.
gamm did not find these significant effects.

Running the gamm on the geese.org data produced results opposed to the
SOVON data, with both flock size and longitude significant effects. This
might be explained by the difference in predictors used.

Checking for spatial autocorrelation
------------------------------------

The semivariogram of the residuals was plotted using functions from two
different packages, nlme::Variogram and gstat::variogram. Both failed to
show any spatial autocorrelation. Were this to be found, @ECOG:ECOG5171
suggest that an implementation of the gls method in R - which allows for
the specification of a correlation structure - should be able to account
for it. This method is called internally by gamm as part of its lme
function, making gamm an effective way of dealing with it as well.

Model diagnostic plots
----------------------

Without exception, the model diagnostic plots are far from ideal. This
prompted a look at two other ways of modelling family sizes. It might be
that the assumption of a Poisson error distribution made when fitted
these generalised models is not a good one. Transforming the data
(advised against by [@MEE3:MEE321]) did not improve the diagnostic
plots. The main issue might be that the family size is very strictly
bounded between 1 and 10 and forced to take integer values. The
following approaches were tried to help with this.

Using family size counts
------------------------

The SOVON dataset presents family sizes as counts for each flock of the
number of families of size x present. These counts are also integers
bounded by 0, but otherwise have no upper limit. A model using these
counts as a response, with a smooth function of family size, the number
of families, the flock size, and a smooth function of longitude as fixed
effects was run. The model found all predictors to be significant. The
diagnostic plots were not improved. This could be attributed to the
large number of zeroes present when families did not take high values.
This model can't be used with the geese.org data.

Using a multinomial logistic regression
---------------------------------------

Since the family sizes can only take 10 values, I tried modelling them
as polychotomous categorical responses using the MCMCglmm function. This
is time-consuming, and not to be pursued unless there's a very good
reason.

Issues
======

1.  A Poisson distribution may not be the right one. A quasipoisson
    distribution was tried and did not help the model. A negative
    binomial error structure could be tried.
2.  Three possible response variables are possible: the number of
    juveniles (absolute family size) in each family, the mean number of
    juveniles in a family per flock, and the counts of families of size
    x in a flock. A choice other than family size prevents the
    comparison of the SOVON and geese.org datasets.
3.  The predation index is not used in any of these models and may need
    to be accounted for, since families in high predation years may be
    smaller than the mean even prior to migration.
4.  The predation index is a mean value calculated as the mean of
    ordinal values from a differing number of locations in each year.
    When coerced to a factor, it either takes as many unique values as
    there are years, or has to be classified into intervals which lose
    the differences between successive years, since only peaks and
    troughs are really different from each other.
5.  Duration of winter, calculated as the number of days between the
    autumn and spring migration peaks, may be an important predictor of
    family size. Family splitting, or juvenile dispersal, may be a
    function of biological processes (increasing body mass of the
    juveniles leading to increased within-family competition for food,
    for example), which may be proxied by time. All models agree that
    the number of days since the start of winter is a significant
    predictor of family size. In longer winters, the probability of
    detecting smaller families is thus increased (unless juvenile
    dispersal is also reduced by conditions correlated with long
    winters).

* * * * *
